Folha de S.Paulo - Internacional - En - Brazil - Malls Ask for Federal Help Against "Rolezinhos" - 20/01/2014     





Advertising

Advertising



Folha de S.Paulo

  NOTICIAS EN ESPAÑOL   NOTÍCIAS EM PORTUGUÊS

Meet Folha de S.Paulo Conozca la Folha de S.Paulo Folha de S.Paulo in Portuguese Follow us:

Follow Us

 Sections Opinion Brazil World Business São Paulo Science & Health Sports Culture Travel Ombudsman 
Latest Photo Galleries
Browse some of the best images from the protests that swept Brazil Published on 14/08/02013
Latest from Galleries Section
  Brazilian Markets 


 12h38

Bovespa

 -0,00%  49,177  
 16h43

Gold

 +0,00%  117  
 12h26

Dollar

 -0,55%  2,3330  
 16h30

Euro

 +0,49%  2,65250  








Malls Ask for Federal Help Against "Rolezinhos"

 01/20/2014-09h10 
Advertising


Tweet


 YURI GONZAGA
LEANDRO MACHADO
FROM SÃO PAULO 
 Alshop, the association representing tenants of malls across the country, will ask for federal aid to help suspend "rolezinhos" in shopping centers. As the events have left the boundaries of São Paulo, the association fears increased losses. Shopping centers have opted to close their doors in order to prevent "rolezinhos" from taking place. According to the association, these events also lead to insecurity and upset customers. The young people who promote the events through social media say they only want to have fun, dance, date and hang out in the malls. see the pictures "We're going to get in touch with the Presidency [of the Republic] to try to set a meeting. Dilma [Rousseff], who brought the leaders of last year's demonstrations together, needs to call to the leaders of these events as well," says Nabil Sahyoun, president of Alshop. To him, it is necessary to "prohibit this type of invitation. If they're minors, hold the parents accountable." The president of Alshop also demanded more policing and harsher punishments for the organizers of the "rolezinhos." "If you have a house and someone invades it, you're going to do something so that it doesn't happen again. Let's take the question of ineffectiveness right to the ultimate consequences. The law is on our side." Over the weekend, the JK Iguatemi mall, in the west end of São Paulo, closed its doors almost 10 hours before regular closing time because of around 100 people wanted to go inside to hold a protest against racism. see the pictures Mall tenants reported losses of up to US$ 17,000 due to the lost day. "There are pregnant women, children and the elderly who panic when a mall is invaded by 400 or 500 young people that start running through the corridors. We are disgusted. Customers are disgusted," says Sahyoun. According to Alshop, shopping centers generate 1.5 million jobs in the country. After police took action during a "rolezinho" in the Metrô Itaquera mall at the beginning of the month, social movements such as the "sem-teto" (homeless) and organized groups also came to support and promote events inside shopping centers. Translated by JILL LANGLOIS Read the article in the original language 
 +Latest news in english World Cup to Have Nearly 2,000 New Flights to Meet Demand Long Waits Inevitable at Today's Wonders of the World Get to Know the New Look of the Folha Website 


share this





  Brazil  World  Business  São Paulo  Science & Health  Sports  Culture  Travel  Ombudsman   Copyright Folha de S.Paulo. All rights reserved. All materials contained in this page may not be reproduced in any media, whether electronic or printed, without the prior written permission of Folhapress.