Reclaim the streets | From Brazil	- Folha de S.Paulo - Blogs       





       





 
	



			
	  




  

 

 
 Publicidade 


 

 
 Publicidade 


 

 
 Publicidade 


 



  


 

Folha de S.Paulo

Um jornal a serviço do Brasil

 
 
      Login - Logout     Assine a Folha  Atendimento  Versão Impressa  

 
 Publicidade  



  

      Opinião 
   Política 
   Mundo 
   Economia 
   Cotidiano 
   Esporte 
   Cultura 
   F5 
   Tec 
   Classificados 
   Blogs 
   Seções 
   
  SP  

     

    

 

Últimas notícias



  Busca Buscar no sites da Folha Buscar no Site Impresso Guia Folha 

   		
 
 




From Brazil



with Vincent Bevins and guests

 

  Profile  About Vincent Bevins, the blog, and contributors Claire Rigby and Dom Phillips  Perfil completo 




  
 
  

Reclaim the streets


Por frombrazil
  08/01/14 23:19   
 In São Paulo, taking to the streets involves far more than protests, riots and demonstrations. It’s also about taking back space from the concrete jungle for parties, festivals, public parks and shopping-mall meetups – ‘ rolezinhos.’ The poster in the photo above by Claire Rigby reads “More love, please.”  By Claire Rigby 2013 may be remembered as the year Brazil took to the streets. Or depending on what’s around the corner, it may be remembered as a mere precursor to what came next. But whatever 2014 has up its sleeve, in São Paulo a tendency to take to the streets en masse, invading public spaces and investing them with life and colour, runs deeper and wider than last June’s headline-grabbing protests. The push for a more humane city – more street life, more music and more space for human interaction – takes in  creative types infiltrating music and art onto the streets of the c entro, and campaigners for a new downtown park. It includes the bike shop renting private land to create a mini public square, and the working-class kids turning up in their hundreds at the mall, in Facebook-driven public actions known as ‘ rolezinhos ‘. And though less overtly politicized so far than the UK’s 1990s Reclaim the Streets movement, which evolved from staging euphoric anti-car parties in the streets to embrace anti-capitalism, the struggle to take possession of the city’s public spaces is becoming more interesting by the week. Lord knows, São Paulo’s unforgiving urban landscape needs the human touch more than most. In depressing contrast with the warmth and courtesy you encounter every day here from its inhabitants, across large swathes of the city, the bleakly over-developed built environment presents a blunt, blank face to the world, all walls, railings and asphalt. At the heart of South America’s largest metropolis, on the edge of the Tropic of Capricorn, sun and rain ricochet off concrete and more concrete, pedestrians take their lives in their hands crossing the street, and the obsession with ‘verticalization’ that began in the 1950s seems to never run out of steam, with new towerblocks rising endlessly, citywide (see  Corruption – it’s the private sector ).  O n the Rua Augusta, a long street that runs from Jardins over Avenida Paulista and down into Centro, the demolition of low-level buildings in favour of huge apartment blocks is still in full swing – as is a campaign to save one large, tree-lined plot of land from its fate as the proposed site of a pair of yet more tower blocks. Driven by an eclectic bunch of protest veterans, ‘occupy Centro’ activists and more conservative local residents, the movement to create a new public park, Parque Augusta, on the rare remaining scrap of green  held a series of vigils outside the proposed park’s padlocked gates over Christmas and into the new year, including a  Domingo no Parque SÓQÑ   (‘Sunday in the Park [ Not ]’) event on 5 January), held in the street outside the locked gates under the slogan ‘The street is a park too!’. Meanwhile in Vila Madalena, where public spaces and greenery are also in short supply, at the bar/café/gallery/bike shop  Tag and Juice, owners Billy Castilho and Pablo Gallardo have seized the chance to rent a vacant lot opposite their shop, to use it as a mini-park. The lot, open whenever Tag and Juice is open, has hosted art exhibitions, mini food fests and live music, providing shade from a tree and grass to sit down on, just round the corner from Beco do Batman, the epicentre of SP’s street art scene, where a long winding alley is plastered with work by some of the city’s finest urban artists.
Praça Tag and Juice. © Claire Rigby
Party people On the cool cutting edge of the movement to infiltrate more fun into SP’s streets are clubnights like the pioneering  Voodoohop,  created in 2009 by the German DJ Thomas Haferlach. Voodoohop has thrown colourful, unpretentious parties and happenings all over Centro, in the streets and in some of its most interesting spaces: at  Trackers,  a many-roomed, no-frills petri-dish for new clubnights; on the top floor of the residential Edifício Planalto, towering over Centro’s western margins; and on the Minhocão, a godforsaken flyover that snakes through São Paulo at 3rd-floor height. The highway is closed evenings and Sundays, when it becomes a de facto, no-frills High Line park frequented by strolling families, joggers and cyclists, snogging couples and, on the central reservation, the odd groups of friends sharing a discreet sundown spliff. Métanol,  a clubnight collective headed by DJ Akin Deckard, has also graced the city with its fresh, feel-good Métanol na Rua parties, spilling into the roads in Vila Madalena and beyond, spinning its sunny Saturday afternoon vibes on into the night. And in a similar vein,  Selvagem,  voted 2013’s best party by the jury of  Guia, Folha’s weekly listings supplement, held a series of indoor-outdoor Sunday afternoon events last year at Paribar, a bar/restaurant set at the edge of a tucked-away square in Centro. It’s no coincidence that so much interest should be focused on Centro. There’s a widespread sense of affection for the region, left to rack and ruin for many years but also blessed with some of the best architecture in the city. Far from the social and cultural wasteland imagined by some of SP’s elite, and despite its problems, which include a simmering crack epidemic, downtown SP is packed with heart and soul, and busy with street life – around the crowded 25 de Março shopping region, all over República and up the hill into Bixiga, where people sit out on their doorsteps and linger in botecos on hot summer nights. São Paulo’s real urban deserts, arguably, are in its affluent western neighbourhoods: in places like Itaim Bibi and Jardins, and in Brooklin and Berrini, where luxury apartment blocks loom coldly behind railings, and large houses shelter behind blank, impenetrable walls. You can walk for many blocks in parts of these neighbourhoods and never see a soul – just gates sliding open briefly to discharge powerful, glossy cars.
The city seen from the top of Edifício Itália. © Claire Rigby
Roll on In the city’s huge, poor periphery, in contrast, where a different kind of architectural chaos prevails, there’s no shortage of human warmth and interaction at street level. But in an equal and opposite reaction to the move to colonize the streets downtown, in the run-up to Christmas, a different kind of movement was born, taking the search for places to gather in a new direction: the  rolezinho. Roughly translatable as ‘little excursions’ or outings, rolezinhos are offline meetups organized on Facebook. In December, a series of them brought flocks of teenagers together inside shopping malls around the city’s vast suburbs. The appearance of fun-seeking crowds of working-class teens, many from neighbouring favelas, struck panic into shopping centre management, some of their customers, and into military police called to the various scenes, who appear to have criminalized the youngsters at a glance, making arrests at each of December’s rolezinhos despite no crimes having been reported. ‘If this had been a large crowd of white, middle-class kids, as has happened a number of times, would this have been called a flash mob?’ asked the anthropologist Alexandre Barbosa Pereira, who specializes in the culture of SP’s periphery, interviewed as part of a  wide-ranging article by Eliane Brum  at El País’s Portuguese-language site.   Brum writes that a number of rolezinhos planned for January have been cancelled: ‘Their organizers, young people who work as office boys and assistants, are afraid to lose their jobs by getting arrested for being where they are not meant to be – an unwritten law, but one that’s always followed in Brazil.’ As if to prove it, no fewer than 23 people were detained for questioning after a  rolezinho at Shopping Internacional de Guarulhos  on 14 December – but with no actual crimes reported, all 23 were later  released without charge. Rolezinho participants claim a variety of reasons for having turned up – mainly that they are out to have fun, flirt and meet other youngsters at the shopping centre – standard behaviour for teenagers worldwide, as well as legitimate claims that the facts of the rolezinhos so far bear out. See  this YouTube video  from a rolezinho held at Shopping Metrô Itaquera on 7 December, where chattering pre-teens and teenagers are seen milling about aimlessly, at one point fleeing excitedly from a handful of police officers walking through the mall. Then check out the almost unanimous comments below it: ‘ favelados’, ‘ raça nojenta ’, ‘ bando de vagabundos sem pai e mãe ’, ‘ gente feia e mal vestidos ’ (‘favela-dwellers’, ‘disgusting race’, ‘motherless fatherless layabouts’, ‘ugly, badly dressed people’). The latest rolezinho, which gathered 400 youngsters together at  Shopping Tucuruvi last Saturday  (4 January), ended with panicked shopkeepers calling the police to eject the 400 kids, and the mall closing down three hours early, with no arrests or reports of any trouble having been caused.
Rolezinho participants are searched by security guards at Shopping Internacional de Guarulhos. Robson Ventura/Folhapress
Perfect storms Meanwhile back in Centro, the campaign around the creation of Parque Augusta rolls on. The Prefeitura (City Hall) announced its approval of the new park’s creation just before Christmas, but with its gates still padlocked, the parks’ champions are still working to secure the land as a public space. The current sporadic occupations of the street outside the park, in front of the locked gates, might not quite amount to a Taksim Square moment for São Paulo; and a series of ruined shopping-mall tweetups don’t necessarily amount to much more than the discrimination faced every day elsewhere by the same kids, whose faces, posture, accents, clothes don’t pass muster in their very own city. But as Taksim Square itself showed – and as seen in São Paulo in June 2013′s perfect storm, when a series of small demos over bus-fare rises spiraled to epic proportions, fuelled by a  brutal crackdown on demonstrators by police, leaving a small, smouldering long tail of unrest in Rio, São Paulo and beyond – when things kick off, the trigger can come from the most unexpected of places.  
Shopping Internacional de Guarulhos, 14 December. Robson Ventura/Folhapress
 
 






 Tweet 
 
 14 




 Mais opções 
     Google+     Facebook     Copiar url     RSS    Maior |  Menor   



 
  Comentários  Facebook  
 



14 comentários feitos no blog

  

 coach factory comentou em 17/01/14 at 23:22   

estimated at around Christmas a few days will be held

 

 Louis Vuitton outlet comentou em 17/01/14 at 5:33   

I purchased these Louis Vuitton outlet. I like how style they’re they ended up extremely wonderful!! I convey these Louis Vuitton outlet all the time. They may be quite perfectly made and go along with just about nearly anything!

 

 isabel marant shoes comentou em 15/01/14 at 12:55   

The next time I read a blog, I hope that it doesnt disappoint me as significantly as this 1. I mean, I know it was my selection to read, but I basically thought youd have something fascinating to say. All I hear is often a bunch of whining about some thing that you simply could fix should you werent too busy seeking for attention.
[url=http://www.sneaker-isabelmarant.com]isabel marant shoes[/url]

 

 wow gold comentou em 15/01/14 at 8:17   

My associate takes pleasure in the fashion survey wow gold generate.

 

 Mcthune female exscort Katherina comentou em 15/01/14 at 5:45   

I have been a yahoo users for some years now. I am only starting to make use of the tools which they provide, one of which being blog posts. I have written a blog and would like to know if my blog posts are being seen by others. If not then does anyone know how I get my blogs posts read..

 

 Ambalaje Plastic comentou em 14/01/14 at 22:01   

Thanks for another beneficial website. The best place otherwise may well I am getting that type of data coded in a real best method? I own a undertaking that we are just now jogging upon, and I have been on the particular glance out with regard to such information.

 

 legging comentou em 14/01/14 at 15:18   

Incredibly terrific publish. I merely located your website as well as want to point out that I have actually beloved exploring your own site posts. After all I will be opting-in inside your give and I’m wanting you are submitting once more soon!

 

 shanghai escort comentou em 14/01/14 at 2:15   

I like your website content very much,can I on my website reprint your article?

 

 Zulma Sodek in Paris comentou em 13/01/14 at 13:10   

This is an outstanding entry and I couldnt agree additional with what you have been producing about. Thanks for this fantastic share.

 

 Tumbleson Inez comentou em 12/01/14 at 13:22   

How many blog post should i have before i start promoting it?

 

 coach.jcrsys.com comentou em 12/01/14 at 4:01   

in the COACH America official website

 

 Ambalaje Cofetarii comentou em 10/01/14 at 4:42   

Superb art! This is actually the variety of data which have been allowed to be provided through the internet. Waste on the search engines because of setting this post upper! Come on over as well as discuss with my site. Appreciate it Implies)

 

 Alberto lopes comentou em 09/01/14 at 23:10   

that’s Brazil!!!

 

 Best Mortgage Lenders comentou em 09/01/14 at 14:08   

This is definitely a worthy movement. I’m hoping to see some big changes in Sao Paulo in the coming year.

  
 
 


    RSS Subscribe to RSS feed    Email vbevins@gmail.com    Twitter @vinncent    

Buscar

Busca Buscar no sites da Folha  
    Recent posts From Brazil   
     1   Rio’s police ‘pacification’ program on the defensive       2   Rio and graffiti artists – friends or foes?       3   Protests, and the World Cup – Changing attitudes       4   Carnaval spreads across the land       5   Brazil’s Gay Kiss    
 SEE PREVIOUS POSTS  

 

Tags

Art Bicycles Brazil Carnaval Commodities Corinthians corruption Crime Culture Currency War Dilma Economy Eike Batista Elections FLIP Football Gaviões da Fiel Haddad Hip Hop Inflation Infrastructure International Relations Journalism Literature Lula Mantega Music Neymar Obama Oil Pacification Paraty Passe Livre Police Politics Protests Religion Rio Soccer são paulo Tourism urbanism US Violence World Cup






		 
     Folha de S.Paulo   Folha de S.Paulo   Sobre a Folha  Expediente  Fale com a Folha  Folha en Español  Folha in English  E-mail Folha  Empreendedor Social  Fale Conosco  Ombudsman  Atendimento ao Assinante  ClubeFolha  PubliFolha  Banco de Dados  Datafolha  Folhapress  Treinamento  Trabalhe na Folha  Publicidade  Feeds do site  Regras de acesso ao site 	        Login | Logout   Assine a Folha  Atendimento  Versão Impressa    Política   Equilíbrio e Saúde  Poder&Política  Folhaleaks 	    Mundo   Mundo  BBC Brasil  Deutsche Welle  Financial Times  The Guardian  The New York Times 	    Economia   Mercado  Folhainvest  Indicadores 	     Opinião   Editoriais  Blogs  Colunas  Tendências/Debates 	       Cotidiano   Cotidiano  Educação  Loterias  Pelo Brasil  Ranking Universitário  Revista sãopaulo  Ribeirão Preto  Rio de Janeiro  Trânsito 	     Esporte   Esporte  Folha na Copa  Paulista 2013  Rio 2016  Tênis  Turfe  Velocidade 	     Ciência   Ciência  Ambiente 	     Saúde   Mercado 	       Cultura   Ilustrada  Cartuns  Comida  Grade de TV  Guia  Ilustríssima  Quadrinhos  Serafina 	     Tec   Tec 	     F5   F5  Bichos  Celebridades  Colunistas  Estranho!  Eu Amo  Factoides  #fofices  Fotos  Horóscopo  Humanos  Televisão  Vídeos 	       + Seções   Acervo Folha  Em Cima da Hora  Erramos  Especiais  Folha Transparência  Folha Íntegra  Folhinha  Fotografia  Horóscopo  Infográficos  Turismo  Folha 10  Minha História 	     TV Folha   TV 	     Classificados   Empregos  Imóveis  Negócios e Carreiras  Veículos 	     Painel do Leitor   Painel do Leitor  Envie sua Notícia  Paute a Folha  Semana do Leitor 	      
 

Acesso o aplicativo para tablets e smartphones

  

   Copyright Folha de S.Paulo. Todos os direitos reservados. É proibida a reprodução do conteúdo desta página em qualquer meio de comunicação, eletrônico ou impresso, sem autorização escrita da Folhapress ( pesquisa@folhapress.com.br ).   

   
			
  
 Publicidade 




 
 

 
 


 Publicidade 




Folha Shop

Compare preços: