Brazil does not have apartheid, exactly | From Brazil	- Folha de S.Paulo - Blogs       





       





 
	



			
	  




  

 

 
 Publicidade 


 

 
 Publicidade 


 

 
 Publicidade 


 



  


 

Folha de S.Paulo

Um jornal a serviço do Brasil

 
 
      Login - Logout     Assine a Folha  Atendimento  Versão Impressa  

 
 Publicidade  



  

      Opinião 
   Política 
   Mundo 
   Economia 
   Cotidiano 
   Esporte 
   Cultura 
   F5 
   Tec 
   Classificados 
   Blogs 
   Seções 
   
  SP  

     

    

 

Últimas notícias



  Busca Buscar no sites da Folha Buscar no Site Impresso Guia Folha 

   		
 
 




From Brazil



with Vincent Bevins and guests

 

  Profile  About Vincent Bevins, the blog, and contributors Claire Rigby and Dom Phillips  Perfil completo 




  
 
  

Brazil does not have apartheid, exactly


Por frombrazil
  22/01/14 17:01   
 “Apartheid” is too strong a word to describe Brazil’s serious class and race problems, says Mauricio Savarese. But it comes closer to describing the truth than the often-repeated claim that Brazil is a country without racism. Here, it’s not the state which is prejudiced. Above, youth at a planned ‘rolezinho’ in Rio de Janeiro. By Mauricio Savarese A few years ago a professor tried to get a sense of the social background of the students in my class. First question to his 45 pupils: “How many of you have been out of São Paulo?” Everyone raised their hands. “How many are working?” Fewer people raised their hands. That went on for ten minutes. In the end, two questions made one thing very clear: those seats weren’t for everyone. “How many of you went to one of our terrible public schools?” It was just me, and one other student. Everyone else in the room had studied at private schools. “How many of you are black?” The other student was the only one to raise his hand. Things were different in all the other classes, in 2002, at one of Brazil’s best journalism schools. There surely is racism in Brazil, and it could not have been any different for the last country in the Americas to abolish slavery. Things have improved, but this is the blackest place outside Africa and yet there are few Afro-Brazilians in politics, high corporate jobs or in the judiciary. The flashmobs at São Paulo malls, known as “rolezinhos,”  made all that prejudice self-evident: these people, young, mostly poor and black, will be discriminated against, even when all they are is heavy consumers trying to have some stupid fun. All these things are pretty shocking. But they don’t seem to be enough for some. Since they need more convincing, they call it “apartheid.” They probably think there is a Brazilian Nelson Mandela somewhere in waiting. By comparing Brazil to a brutal regime that has taken decades for South Africans to dismantle, they find no difference between a democracy that needs fixing and a racial dictatorship that enforced their views through a wicked legal system. That kind of plagiarism is a new fad in Brazilian politics. Please, forgive us. Most of us can’t relate to suffering that took place overseas. It is true that Brazil is much closer to “apartheid” than it is the fallacious “there is no racism here” claim. But our Supreme Court is headed by a black man, we do have affirmative action in universities and the outspoken hatred I saw twice in the London tube has no place here. We have a reasonably active national secretariat for racial diversity. We should be prosecuting more people for racist crimes, but the fact that notable racists are looked down upon is a sign that Brazil doesn’t have much to do with the officially racist South Africa that arrested Mandela. In Brazil, the political and legal systems are fighting racism. But there is surely an issue with opportunities in the private sector and in political parties. There has never been a Brazilian Barack Obama, a black man leading a major ticket. Black CEOs? Only if they start the businesses themselves. There are two other words that have become bucket adjectives in Brazil. People are allowed to use them freely, without any regard to what they actually mean: “fascist” and “populist.” It is probably better to deal with those when the presidential elections are upon us, come November. Racism is big enough of an issue in Brazil for us to feel the need to use foreign words to make the concept more clear. Our challenges lie in reinforcing existing mechanisms to promote prosperous diversity. Or perhaps, in creating new ones so that the corporate and the political establishment can embrace Brazil as it is. Manipulating Mandela’s legacy won’t do us any good. Mauricio Savarese is a Brazilian journalist, originally from Ipiranga, in São Paulo’s zona sul, and is the author of the blog, “ A Brazilian operating in this area.” He was formerly a reporter in Brasília for UOL and is active on  Twitter. Read his other thoughts on rolezinhos here. 
 






 Tweet 
 
 34 




 Mais opções 
     Google+     Facebook     Copiar url     RSS    Maior |  Menor   



 
  Comentários  Facebook  
 



34 comentários feitos no blog

  

 mejores tabletas android comentou em 31/01/14 at 10:25   

hello there and thank you for your information? I’ve definitely picked up something new from right here. I did on the other hand expertise a few technical points the usage of this website, as I skilled to reload the site many times prior to I could get it to load properly. I were brooding about in case your hosting is OK? No longer that I’m complaining, however sluggish loading cases instances will often impact your placement in google and can damage your quality score if ads and marketing with Adwords. Well I’m adding this RSS to my email and could look out for a lot more of your respective intriguing content. Make sure you replace this again soon..

 

 Elly Perez comentou em 31/01/14 at 10:24   

Hey there, Do you still work on the blog of yours? I’ve came across 16 grammar faults. Warm regards,
Elly Perez

 

 Jenn Frasier comentou em 31/01/14 at 2:43   

Hey there, Do you still work on the blog of yours? I have encountered 19 grammar mistakes. Sincerely,
Jenn Frasier

 

 Jennifer Darling comentou em 30/01/14 at 18:57   

Hello there, Do you grammar check the blog of yours? I’ve encountered 11 writing faults. Best wishes,
Jennifer Darling

 

 Jenn Frost comentou em 30/01/14 at 14:08   

Hello there, Are you still working on the website of yours? I found 11 grammar errors. Kind regards,
Jenn Frost

 

 gucci replica comentou em 30/01/14 at 7:08   

Hey there would you mind sharing which blog platform you’re
working with? I’m going to start my own blog in
the near future but I’m having a difficult time making a decision between BlogEngine/Wordpress/B2evolution and Drupal.
The reason I ask is because your design and style seems different then most blogs
and I’m looking for something completely unique.
P.S My apologies for being off-topic but I had to ask!

 

 Carlos comentou em 24/01/14 at 15:20   

Negros e mestiços são maioria em algumas regiões do Brasil. Talvez sejam a maioria no país como um todo. O fato é que os brasileiros de uma forma geral dão muito pouca importância à educação. Colocam Segurança, Transporte e Saúde antes da educação. Acabam infelizmente não conseguindo nenhuma delas. Se os negros são a maioria da população pobre, e esta população não dá importância à educação, logo, pela lógica, negros e mestiços não dão importância à educação. É uma pena.

 

 Jerry comentou em 26/01/14 at 9:22   

In the USA we have a very strong PUBLIC school system. A small percentage attend private schools. Its not just spending money but also investing in good school administration. We also have the GED program. In addition, we have lower cost high quality community colleges and online degrees. Almost anyone can have a college degree.

 

 Rain comentou em 24/01/14 at 13:31   

Brazil hates itself, and that is part of the problem. The generally low self esteem of the country does little to help things. The rich don’t care, the middle class can’t figure out how to make a difference and the poor have no power to change anything. By the way, I applaud your English, but it does need some help overall. I don’t know if you wrote the article in English or you have a translator, either way..it needs some help. I am simply saying this because the English speaking world is a hard and unforgiving place who will overlook what you are trying to say in favour of picking on your syntax and grammar. Write some more, we need more Brazilian voices writing in English, versus foreigners opinionating in English. Best, a foreigner living in Brazil.

 

 Vincent Bevins comentou em 24/01/14 at 16:25   

You have some grammar mistakes in your comment. “Low self esteem of the country”? “The English speaking world is a hard and unforgiving place…WHO will overlook?” Any grammar/style mistakes in this blog post are mine, as I (quickly) edited this piece. Point something out and I’ll fix it. Yours truly,
Vincent
The English-speaking world

 

 Otton Bexaron comentou em 26/01/14 at 2:38   

One difference: Brazil has 500 years “under” the Roman Catholic Church manipulated by white clergy from Europe, like the one who tries to stop Belo Monte since the 1970′s!. Dr. Michelle Obama (Harvard Law, like her husband!), Dr. Condoleeza Rice (International Relations, Princeton) former U.S. Secretary of State – both come from black slave families in the segregated U.S.South – (Michelle’s great-great-grandmother was sold for $ 8 in 1857). But after the Civil War 1861-1865 – White Presbyterians and Methodists from the North opened seminaries to train Black men to become clergymen. That is where Michelle’s and Condoleeza’s ancestors received an education. Those seminaries later evolved into universities for Blacks (like Tuskeegee Institute) and by 1900 there were Black physicians, pharmacists, scientists, dentists and lawyers in the U.S.. Likewise – in the British Caribbean, the protestant missionaries provided very good education and many Blacks from Caribbean backgrounds have become prominent in the U.S. and Britain.

 

 Rain comentou em 26/01/14 at 12:01   

This is very true. Thanks for the elaboration.

 

 Rain comentou em 26/01/14 at 12:00   

I am not from an English speaking country, nor did I claim to have perfect grammar. The English in the article is awkward and stilted. You should go read English speaking news for a while, and learn how to make the language flow. Then, apply it to this article and whatever else you do as well.

 

 Enzo comentou em 24/01/14 at 13:17   

Há mais brancos que nergros na foto.

 

 Edson Cadette comentou em 24/01/14 at 12:31   

Brazilians love to sugar coat the racial problem in the country. Ask anyone, and I mean anyone in Brazil about our heritage and one will get the sense that Brazilians are proud of its mixed race population. Of course this does not mean a thing in terms of oportunity or lack thereof for blacks in general. While Blacks make up half of the population, its representation in the Academia, Politics and Business is close to zero. Of course this did not bother the other half of the population at all. However, the minute that blacks in Brazil started demand equal oportunities in a country that was very confortable with the invisibility of its black population the media started showing its true color. I mean, since the get going they were attacking affirmative action programs. They never bother to ask why the social and economic gap between blacks and whites in Brazil is so wide spread. The after effects of the institution of slavery is in every corner of the country, but brazilians do not want to hear about a thing that supposedly was over 120 years ago. The true of the matter is that until Brazil face its ugly past regarding the more than 350 years of slavery the country will not move foward. Half of its population wants the benefit of the wealth that certainly was built on the back of its forefathers.

 

 Christopher Wright comentou em 24/01/14 at 11:19   

I think you can see by the number of comments it’s an important issue. The solution is pragmatic – evolution and not revolution. And the result, a more prosperous diversity appeals more to the noble foundations of a proud country such as Brazil.

 

 Mauricio comentou em 24/01/14 at 9:32   

Mais um…
Gene acorda!
Os rolesinhos foram apenas uma brincadeira mal sucedida. Uma ideia ridícula levada a cabo por um grupo de adolescentes enfadados e que deu no que deu. Em NADA!
As tentativas de politizar o fato são infantis e sem sentido.
Não nego que exista racismo no Brasil, ele existe, mas é muito menor do que se propagandeia hoje em dia, pois é ridículo falar em preconceito onde mais de 80% da população é mestiça.
E pior deste artigo é a foto do pretenso rolesinho. No caso o que aparece é uma foto de uma passeata organizada a pretexto dos rolesinhos levada a cabo por um dos tais movimentos sociais…
Eu vi um desses rolesinho acontecer. Vi a garotada bem vestida. Todas raças e cores presentes e era uma brincadeira. Uma brincadeira tola e de mau gosto, mas uma brincadeira.
Deu no que deu.
NADA!

 

 Marcinho comentou em 24/01/14 at 10:02   

… roleZinho; malsucedida; propagandeia? é propaga; um desseS rolesinho? “um desses rolezinhos”. Está bem difícil mesmo!

 

 Andre comentou em 24/01/14 at 14:08   

De fato: para os participantes, apenas uma brincadeira que acabou por não dar em muita coisa. Mas a “politização” do rolezinho não é exatamente “o porquê dos rolezinhos”. A politização está justamente em nós, que estamos do outro lado. Na nossa reação! Só uma mente muito, mas muito rasa, pra não ver nenhum problema na forma como reagimos, do lado de cá, ao rolezinho da periferia ao passo que temos a bicharada da USP fazendo uma baderna sem precedentes no Eldorado há anos e todos nós achamos lindo! É um problema de preconceito sim. E não são os “rolezeiros” que estão politizando tudo. Como disse o autor, eles apenas estão tentando ter algum tipo de diversão, ainda que estúpida. A politização se deu por conta da nossa reação. A nossa reação foi absurda e evidenciou todo esse racismo velado que temos em nossa sociedade.

 

 Renato Moreira comentou em 23/01/14 at 23:08   

Nao sou contra manifestacoes desde que respeitem nosso semelhante que quer trabalhar ex Shoppings Agora o Brasil eh um pais Imoral e soh aparece escandalos em todos o setores da sociedade somos o esgoto do mundo

 

 Josenaldo Silva comentou em 23/01/14 at 23:01   

Mauricio, por favor, coloca uma traducao audivel correta, voce ouviu a traducao audivel em ingles? meu Deus, que coisa horrivel… isso ‘e ridiculo. Um grande mico…
fico com vergonha disso…
Se um colega Londrino aqui ouvir essa traducao, ele vai rir ou xingar essa tradutora,
Por favor, facam uma mudanca nissom rapido. P.S: desculpem os erros, teclado ingles nao tem acento.

 

 Bruno comentou em 24/01/14 at 0:11   

Josenaldo, a leitura é feita por computador. Leia as matérias em português. A Folha deveria tirar a opção em matérias em outras línguas.

 

 Vincent Bevins comentou em 24/01/14 at 10:16   

Obrigado por isso. Sou o editor deste blog e vou ver o que podemos fazer. Devemos tirá-la ou usar um programa que lê inglês. Vincent

 

 José Carlos comentou em 30/01/14 at 7:11   

But monitoring readers’ comments is simply censorship, another kind of personal (based upon your preferences) and ideological constraint that should not be nowadays. As a matter of fact, it is pretty ridiculous. But, unfortunately, we do not live in a truly democratic world and totalitarian thinking is not a relic of the past. I am sure you know very well what I am talking about, don’t you? Therefore, just for coherence’s sake, I shall never come back here. Marcus Tullius

 

 Alexandre comentou em 23/01/14 at 22:10   

Why in English? To whom are you writing that?
Quer ser lido no Brasil escreva em Português.

 

 Vincent Bevins comentou em 24/01/14 at 10:17   

Hi Alexandre, This is an English-language blog meant to explain what is happening in Brazil to foreigners. Of course, Brazilians read it too, but that is the original concept. As with many things on Folha.com it often translated as well. Thanks.

 

 Lorenzo Frigerio comentou em 23/01/14 at 21:54   

No Brasil o apartheid é “branco”: as escolas públicas são péssimas e é lá que o povão estuda. Os não pardos valorizam a educação e mandam seus filhos a escolas particulares. É assim que as disparidades sociais no Brasil se eternizam.

 

 Gustavo CL comentou em 23/01/14 at 21:44   

The case of these young people who do the so called “rolezinhos” is emblematic. As one can see by any interview made with them, they are extremely futile. I’m complete sure that almost none of them will ever go to university, not because they can’t, but because they don’t care. They are more than satisfied with their manual labor. They spend half their salary buying expensive caps, shorts and shoes. As they say proudly in interviews, they spend 400 reais in shoes. The kind of price 90% of the white middle class youth wouldn’t dare to pay, even having much more money. They are completly alienated, the attempt of the left to give an ideological reason to their “protest” (sic) is hillarious. These “rolezinhos” participants, which the leftist press want to elevate to the pantheon of national heroes are the same ones, as they’ve said, that take part in “funk parties” on open air, leaving neighbors in an stressful situation No surprise, these people will be a failure when they become adults. So who’s to blame? The whites, of course, with their racism.

 

 Marcelo comentou em 24/01/14 at 4:03   

Excellent point!

 

 Mário Z. comentou em 23/01/14 at 18:09   

A picture is worth a thousand words.

 

 Euclides comentou em 23/01/14 at 17:25   

Caro Maurício, este é um tema em permanente debate. E assim continuará por mais algumas décadas. Será que as políticas afirmativas irão ser a solução? Eu tenho dúvidas! Temos um problema generalizado de educação de má qualidade no Brasile que atinge todas as cores. Precisamos de homnes, e mulheres, com estatura política que transgridam a norma comum e procurem resolver este problema crônico.

 

 Raphael comentou em 23/01/14 at 18:04   

Maurício, a grande questão é que se tratam de dois problemas que se confundem. A questão do texto só faz alusão ao racismo.
Pensa o seguinte: duas pessoas, uma negra e uma branca, as duas adotadas pelos mesmos pais com a mesma idade. Qual tem mais chance de prosperar (infelizmente)?? Qual tem mais chance em uma entrevista??
É inegável que negros são discriminados historicamente, e se não criarmos mecanismos para incentivar fortemente o acesso dos mesmos, será sempre esse domínio que vivemos hoje.
O problema da escola pública também é grave, mas a solução é distinta!

 

 Gustavo CL comentou em 23/01/14 at 21:58   

A insistência nas chamadas entrevistas para argumentar sobre a necessidade de cotas para que a população negra possa avançar não é a toa. Entrevistas utilizam critérios subjetivos, por isto qualquer um pode levianamente teorizar que nelas aparecem igual números de candidatos negros e brancos com iguais qualidades, mas o branco será sempre escolhido. É impossível provar que isto não é verdade, portanto este argumento pode e será sempre utilizado. Além disso, é ok acusar brancos de algo (por exemplo, racismo). Atribuir características negativas a brancos não dá cadeia para ninguém. Esquecem aqueles que se limitam a culpar os brancos pelas mazelas dos negros que em exames de admissão em universidades e que em concursos públicos não é possível saber a raça do participante. A ideia de que o racismo é a causa de toda desigualdade racial é furada pois existem em todo mundo inúmeros exemplos de minorias mais ou menos discriminadas que estão situação econômica melhor que a maioria. Indianos nos EUA, judeus na Europa, incluse pré-Segunda Guerra (sim, frenquentemente é possível saber que uma pessoa é judia em uma entrevista, pelo sobrenome, por exemplo). Outro exemplo que poucos sabem, árabes cristão possuem em Israel situação econômica melhor que os judeus.

 

 Rodrigo comentou em 30/01/14 at 11:03   

Ok. Então segundo a sua brilhante lógica, que parece pautada no “Mein Kampf”, as minorias que estão em situação precária, ali estão por sua própria incompetência??? Darwinismo social? De onde vc fala… 1939? Patético

  
 
 


    RSS Subscribe to RSS feed    Email vbevins@gmail.com    Twitter @vinncent    

Buscar

Busca Buscar no sites da Folha  
    Recent posts From Brazil   
     1   Rio’s police ‘pacification’ program on the defensive       2   Rio and graffiti artists – friends or foes?       3   Protests, and the World Cup – Changing attitudes       4   Carnaval spreads across the land       5   Brazil’s Gay Kiss    
 SEE PREVIOUS POSTS  

 

Tags

Art Bicycles Brazil Carnaval Commodities Corinthians corruption Crime Culture Currency War Dilma Economy Eike Batista Elections FLIP Football Gaviões da Fiel Haddad Hip Hop Inflation Infrastructure International Relations Journalism Literature Lula Mantega Music Neymar Obama Oil Pacification Paraty Passe Livre Police Politics Protests Religion Rio Soccer são paulo Tourism urbanism US Violence World Cup






		 
     Folha de S.Paulo   Folha de S.Paulo   Sobre a Folha  Expediente  Fale com a Folha  Folha en Español  Folha in English  E-mail Folha  Empreendedor Social  Fale Conosco  Ombudsman  Atendimento ao Assinante  ClubeFolha  PubliFolha  Banco de Dados  Datafolha  Folhapress  Treinamento  Trabalhe na Folha  Publicidade  Feeds do site  Regras de acesso ao site 	        Login | Logout   Assine a Folha  Atendimento  Versão Impressa    Política   Equilíbrio e Saúde  Poder&Política  Folhaleaks 	    Mundo   Mundo  BBC Brasil  Deutsche Welle  Financial Times  The Guardian  The New York Times 	    Economia   Mercado  Folhainvest  Indicadores 	     Opinião   Editoriais  Blogs  Colunas  Tendências/Debates 	       Cotidiano   Cotidiano  Educação  Loterias  Pelo Brasil  Ranking Universitário  Revista sãopaulo  Ribeirão Preto  Rio de Janeiro  Trânsito 	     Esporte   Esporte  Folha na Copa  Paulista 2013  Rio 2016  Tênis  Turfe  Velocidade 	     Ciência   Ciência  Ambiente 	     Saúde   Mercado 	       Cultura   Ilustrada  Cartuns  Comida  Grade de TV  Guia  Ilustríssima  Quadrinhos  Serafina 	     Tec   Tec 	     F5   F5  Bichos  Celebridades  Colunistas  Estranho!  Eu Amo  Factoides  #fofices  Fotos  Horóscopo  Humanos  Televisão  Vídeos 	       + Seções   Acervo Folha  Em Cima da Hora  Erramos  Especiais  Folha Transparência  Folha Íntegra  Folhinha  Fotografia  Horóscopo  Infográficos  Turismo  Folha 10  Minha História 	     TV Folha   TV 	     Classificados   Empregos  Imóveis  Negócios e Carreiras  Veículos 	     Painel do Leitor   Painel do Leitor  Envie sua Notícia  Paute a Folha  Semana do Leitor 	      
 

Acesso o aplicativo para tablets e smartphones

  

   Copyright Folha de S.Paulo. Todos os direitos reservados. É proibida a reprodução do conteúdo desta página em qualquer meio de comunicação, eletrônico ou impresso, sem autorização escrita da Folhapress ( pesquisa@folhapress.com.br ).   

   
			
  
 Publicidade 




 
 

 
 


 Publicidade 




Folha Shop

Compare preços: